Up to this point, we've worked with
CUDA libraries to manage our code.
The CPU typically calls host
functions while the GPU calls
device functions.
Invoking GPU work from the CPU
requires a special mechanism.
So far, parallel algorithms
handled this magic for us,
seamlessly calling GPU code behind
Now that we want to implement
our own algorithms without
relying on those libraries,
we need to understand how
to launch GPU code ourselves.
But before diving in,
let's quickly recap the
execution space specifiers
we've encountered so far.
Host functions are compiled into
CPU instructions, called from
the host, and executed on the host.
Similarly,
Device functions are compiled into
GPU instructions, called from the
device, and executed on the device.
There's another annotation
we haven't discussed yet.
When you mark a function with
global, it's compiled into GPU
instructions and executed on the
GPU, but it's called from the CPU.
These functions are
known as CUDA kernels.
Calling a CUDA kernel from
the CPU looks unusual because
of the triple angled brackets
and some numbers inside.
We'll talk about the numbers and
what they mean in a few minutes.
Another important detail is that
the kernel calls are asynchronous,
much like calling a kub algorithm.
The CPU doesn't wait for the
kernel to finish on the GPU.
Before we start writing our
own CUDA kernels, let's recap
how the simulator currently works.
We use an MD-SPAN for a 2D
view of the temperature grid.
Then we transform cell indices
into new temperatures with
CUB device transform.
Under the hood, CUB implements
device transform using CUDA
kernels, which is why they
run asynchronously.
To see how CUDA kernels actually
work, it's best to start with
code we're already familiar with.
So let's try rewriting
our simulator to launch
kernels directly, rather
than relying on CUB.
In this code snippet, we have a
simple CUDA kernel that iterates
over all cells and transforms their
indices into new temperatures.
Notice the triple chevron syntax
when launching it and that the
fourth parameter is a CUDA stream.
By passing a stream here, we can
run the computation asynchronously
on the specified stream.
But as you already know,
the GPU doesn't magically
parallelize code on its own.
This means that a single GPU thread
is computing each cell in sequence.
Overall, this makes our
kernel roughly 10,000
times slower than CUB.
Fortunately, kernels are inherently
parallel, so we can increase
the number of threads.
For instance, to launch
two threads, we pass two
as the second argument in
the triple chevron syntax.
You can see on the right that
doing so nearly doubles the
kernel speed, but simply launching
more threads isn't enough.
If they all process the same
cells, there's no actual speedup.
To fix this, we need to modify
the kernel so each thread
can distinguish itself and
handle a different subset of cells.
That's where ThreadIdx.x comes in.
ThreadIdx.x is a built-in variable
available in CUDA kernels.
It holds the index of
the current thread.
So if we launch two threads,
ThreadIdx.x will be equal to one in
one thread and zero in the other.
With this approach,
each thread processes
a different subset of cells.
In the kernel, we first read
thread idx.x to identify the
current thread's index.
Then each thread starts by
processing the cell whose
index matches its own thread index.
That means that the first thread
works on cell zero and the
second thread works on cell one.
After finishing one cell, we move
ahead by adding the total number
of threads to the cell index.
This way, the first thread
takes cell two next, while
the second thread moves on
to cell three, and so on.
Notice how this scheme allows us
to compute all cells in parallel,
such that one cell is never
processed by multiple threads.
Another observation is that there's
nothing specific in our code that
would limit it to only two threads.
So let's try increasing the
number of threads working
on this CUDA kernel.
Here we've increased the number
of threads to 256, and this
scheme still works great.
Our performance has improved
significantly, but we're still
nowhere near CUB's speed.
Let's see if adding even more
threads can breach this gap.
Ah, now we've launched 2048
threads, and suddenly everything
fails with a cryptic invalid
configuration argument error.
As usual, this means there's
a gap in our understanding.
It turns out that there's a
limit on the number of threads
in a single block.
You cannot launch more
than 1,024 threads.
So what exactly is a thread
block and why does it matter
for our kernel launch?
In CUDA, threads are grouped into
blocks and the entire collection
of these blocks is called a grid.
As we've seen already, each block
can contain up to 1,024 threads.
And every block in a single
kernel launch has the same size.
The threadidx.x variable we've
seen so far stores the threads
local index within its block.
For example, if we have three
blocks, each block will have
a thread with threadidx.x
set to zero and another thread with
threadidx set to one and so on.
That means we end up with
three threads labeled zero,
three labeled one and so forth.
Just as we've used threadidx.x
to distinguish threads within
a block, we also need a way
to identify which block we're in.
To do that, CUDA provides
additional built-in variables.
Blockdim.exe tells us how many
threads there are in each block.
In our example here, every
thread sees two for block dim.x.
Meanwhile, grid dim.x gives the
number of blocks in the grid.
So if grid dim.x is three,
that means that there are
three blocks total.
By multiplying block dim.x by
grid dim.x, we can get the total
number of threads in the grid.
For this example, two times three
gives us six threads in total.
Besides knowing the total
number of threads, we also
need each thread's unique
index across the entire grid.
For that, we use another
built-in variable called
blockidx.x, which holds
the block's index within the grid.
All threads in block 0
see blockidx.x equals
0, while all threads in
block 1 see 1, and so on.
To calculate a thread's global
index, we multiply blockidx.x
by blockdim.x to find out
how many threads there are
before the current block.
Then we add threadidx.x,
which is the thread's local
index, in its block.
For example, the second thread of
the first block multiplies 2 by
0, then adds 1 for its local index,
giving it a global index of 1.
The same computation
results in index 5.
for the last thread
of the last block.
So now we know how to find
each thread's unique index
within the grid, and we also
know the total number of threads.
But a few questions remain.
For example, what block
size should we use?
Unfortunately, there's no
one-size-fits-all answer.
This often comes
down to optimization.
One helpful guideline is to
pick block sizes in multiples
of 32 because of how the GPU
hardware groups threads.
A common default is 256 threads
per block, which we'll use
throughout this course.
The second question is how
many blocks we should launch.
Because we typically want to
maximize parallelism, the grid size
often depends on the problem size.
For example, if we want each thread
to handle exactly one element, a
simple integer division won't work.
Imagine that we have six cells
to process and choose a block
size of four threads.
When we divide six by four,
we get one, which means only
one block is launched and some
threads end up with extra cells.
Instead, we can use CUDA's
ceiling divide to perform
an integer division that rounds up.
Using ceiling divide gives us two,
ensuring enough blocks so each
thread processes exactly one cell.
To specify that we want two
thread blocks, it's sufficient
to pass two as the first parameter
of the triple chevron.
With these changes we're now
launching around 5 million
threads and finally getting
close to CUBS performance.
Of course CUBS still has more
advanced optimizations under
the hood, so fully matching
its speed is unlikely, but
for such a simple kernel this is
already a significant improvement.
So far we've modified our
simulator but haven't yet confirmed
that it still works correctly.
Because our setup is symmetric,
temperatures at the top and
the bottom of the grid NVIDIA
and NVID are identical.
We can do a quick smoke test
by verifying that symmetry
in the first exercise.
The idea is simple.
For a given cell, we find its
mirrored row by subtracting the
rows index from the grid's height.
If everything is correct,
temperatures of these symmetric
cells should be nearly the same.
In this exercise, you'll turn
this function into a CUDA
kernel and launch it with
the triple Chevron syntax.
Now, when you think about it, the
entire row should be symmetrical,
not just a single cell.
In the second exercise, you'll
modify the kernel so that each
thread handles exactly one column.